It's important to
realize that there is
no one version of the mainframe,
but rather a series
of computers that
all adhere to the
mainframe architecture.
By taking this course,
you're learning all about
the core fundamentals of
the mainframe architecture.
Like all other computers,
the mainframe has memory,
and you've probably seen
memory models before.
There are in laptops,
phones, and the mainframe.
Applications and operating
systems need memory.
But there's only so much real
physical memory to go around.
Even on a fully loaded system,
applications are always
hungry for more.
Sometimes it makes sense
to move some of that data
from real memory out
to auxiliary storage.
Sometimes called virtual memory.
Of course, if that data is
needed for faster
access later on,
it can be moved back
into real memory.
On the mainframe, auxiliary or
just OWC storage is kept
on direct-access storage devices,
also known as DASD.
These are full of hard
drives which can be
either a disk or a solid state.
No matter how fast
the drives are,
they're still nowhere near
as fast as real memory.
So the mainframe has to make
a decision about where
that data should be kept.
However, part of the mainframe
architectures is based on
this tight relationship between
real memory and OWC storage.
It's for that reason that
memory on the mainframe
is usually just
referred to as storage.
So when you hear storage,
just know that
we're talking about
something that includes both
on chip memory and OWC storage.
Because the way the architecture
works to the application running,
it's all just storage.
So when an application
comes along and
says it needs a whole
bunch of memory,
all these components
work together
so the application can carry on.
It has this nearly
unlimited amount
of memory when in fact,
all the complexities are being
handled behind the scenes.
In z/OS, the mainframe
operating system
we're going to be
spending most of
our time talking about here,
users and applications
have access to
their own individual
address space.
An address space is simply
a map of storage that is
made available to users
and applications.
The range of the
address space goes all
the way up to 16 exabytes.
An exabyte is the unit that
comes after petabytes.
So that's a lot of space.
By giving an application
and address space,
it's basically saying, yes store
your data anywhere
you'd like in here,
I'll manage it all for you.
Once it's up and running,
z/OS will periodically check on
that memory to see if some
of it can actually be migrated.
In z/OS, memory is placed into
four kilobyte chunks
called pages.
When that memory is in central
storage on real memory,
it occupies what's
called a frame.
When it's moved out
to OWC storage,
it takes up a slot.
When the OS decides to
move a slot to a frame
or a frame to a slot,
that's called paging.
We like for paging to happen
as little as possible
on the mainframe.
Hopefully, the OS identifies with
the right frames to
page out the slots,
and they don't have to
be paged back in because
that paging back and forth is
a fairly complex procedure.
All of these changes are
kept track of in a series
of tables maintained by
the operating system.
In a well-tuned system with
adequate real storage,
memory gets paged out once
and most of it stays there.
The concept of virtual memory is
certainly not unique
to the mainframe,
but the way in which it handles
its virtual memory you can
see is something pretty special.
The most current generation of
the mainframe
architecture is known as
the z/Architecture and it
includes not only the hardware
found in the mainframe,
but the mainframe operating
systems which are
built to take advantage of
the hardware as features.